The military buildup in China is the
biggest military buildup in world
history. And so there's a real urgency
on our side to ensure that we are ahead,
but we stay ahead. And that's going to
take a different level of investment and
different type of thinking than we've
had in the last 20 years. In the 80s,
there were 50 defense contractors and
they got merged. So there are only about
five. There's a lot of room for new
entrance. It's crazy to me that SpaceX
and Androl and Palanteer all had to sue
the Department of War for their first
contract. So the idea is you don't have
to sue anymore. come through the front
door [laughter]
because no one's people are not going to
fight you. We're now excited about lower
cost, faster, more sophisticated
options.
>> Hi listeners, welcome back to No Priors.
We're here today with Emil Michael, the
former chief business officer of Uber,
White [music] House fellow, and
currently CTO of the Department of War.
>> Emil, thanks for joining us. Welcome to
New Prior.
>> Good to see you guys. It's been a long
time.
>> Congratulations on the new role. Um,
very exciting news. Could you describe a
little bit more about what that role is
and what's changed at the Department of
War to sort of create this new war this
new um role this new momentum new
initiatives that you all are focused on?
>> Yeah. So um for a long time at the
department of war there was one
organization called
uh acquisition technology and logistics
and it was all bunched up into one thing
and then about 8 years ago they said
well tech is moving faster on new kinds
of weaponry and defense systems than on
the old system. So we're going to split
out acquisition from research and
engineering they call it. So I'm the
under secretary for research and
engineering which is cool right because
I get to work on the stuff that I used
to work on when I was in Silicon Valley
like with work with entrepreneurs work
with new companies. I'm now responsible
for DARPA which is obviously super cool
because it's most some of the most
advanced research that happens in the
country if not the world. uh in the last
few months I took over as chief AI the
chief AI office in the department of war
which would 3 million employees the
biggest organization with the biggest
budget in the world you know is is not a
small thing to to think about how to do
AI right for and then the defense
innovation unit which is actually based
in Mountain View and it's supposedly the
it's supposed to be the link between
defense industry and uh you know the
startup community that's building
commercial products may have dual use.
And then last is this strategic
capability office which takes kind of
existing
um systems and tries to modify them in
strategic ways or supplement them to get
you know for strategic surprise they
call it. So all that all has technology
underneath it and the idea is to unify
that across the department because we
spend you know $150 billion a year on
tech in one way or the other. So you
want to avoid duplication, you want to
bring things to market faster. That that
was a big announcement yesterday by by
the secretary at uh at Starbase.
>> You mentioned DIU has been involved with
providing early funding to a variety of
promising new defense tech and hardware
companies. Could you tell us a little
bit more about what they've done and how
you've approached that so far?
>> Yeah, DIU's had some good success with
Seronic and and uh and a bunch of other
companies and now it's you know we have
now it's time to do more of it. So, it's
more of a focus and yeah, DARPA is just,
you know, they invented the internet.
You go to their gift shop and they have
like a a napkin that where someone drew
out the internet uh sort of architecture
and they sell that in the gift shop. In
case you guys come to DC, we can get you
get you some of those. [snorts]
>> This is like a I mean, it's an amazing
unification of like a bunch of stuff
that's clearly important to America and
to, you know, global security. uh it's a
very different environment than a lot
and I have seen you in uh in the past
right you've worked with technology
companies and you know even within them
as a leader had this reputation for
being you know high-speed aggressive
dealmaker uh if if I'm allowed to say
that um how does that work with the
department of war which like amazing
impact importance and scale not the
strongest reputation in previous decades
and administrations for speed.
>> Yeah. Well, I I mean hopefully part of
the reason I got chosen for the job and
certainly the reason I took it is to
inject some of that urgency speed, you
know, being a little bit impervious to
barriers and trying to run them over as
opposed to being stopped by them. And it
kind it works with leadership in in
organizations is not is somewhat
transferable, right? If you can show
that kind of urgency and leadership and
create a culture in a company, you could
certainly make some progress in a
bureaucracy or a government agency, it
might not be as fast, but I also have
way more resources, right? And I have a
a way more, you know, in some way is
important mission to humanity. So those
two things are different in some ways
sort of give me the same abilities to
sort of drive fast and people respond. I
mean, I'm getting a lot of people who
want to join my team or other teams at
DO um and across the government and
yeah, it's harder, but uh in some ways
it's more impactful. So, I'm just as
motivated.
>> Yeah, it's been interesting to watch all
the entrepreneurs kind of gathering in
DC in a way that, you know, I really
haven't seen in a while. So, it's it's
been impressive in terms of the types of
talent that you all have been able to
recruit. One thing that I think is
related to moving fast is
prioritization. And I think in another
um interview in the past, you said
something like 14 priorities mean no
priorities at all. And you've kind of
really honed down into a handful of key
areas. Do you mind walking through sort
of those key areas from an overall
broader innovation focus? And then maybe
we can touch on one or two of them as we
go.
>> Yeah, I mean so just to analogize to
Uber or any company that you you know we
worked on together, imagine you went to
a management team and you're like what's
your how many product you know how's
your product line going? You're a series
B company. and you're like, "Well, I've
got 14 product lines." You say, "Well,
wait a minute. Sort of uninvestable,
right?" So, um, when I got here, there
were 14 critical technology areas. So,
critical critical to our national
security. So, I I looked at them. I
said, "Well, number one, that if if
there's that many, they can't be
critical." But number two, hard for
people to hold in their head that many
priorities and wake up every morning
knowing that they have to get up and
execute against those priorities and
make progress because you get
distracted. did you get too much uh
disperate you know uh separation and
therefore not enough resource to any one
thing. So I I cut them down to six a
after studying them and I made it more
actionoriented. So we put sprints behind
them like you would in an engineering
team. So uh you know off the top of my
head the the number one is applied AI
because we're not building a foundation
model at the DO because there's being
hundreds of billions of dollars being
spent by the private sector on this. So,
how do I adapt or use what's being
developed in the in the private sector
and apply it to the Department of War
use cases? So, that's number one. Um,
number two is I don't know if you've
heard of hypersonic missiles, but
they're sort of the newest variation of
um we used to have nuclear weapons and
ballistic missiles. Now, these
hypersonics, Elon talks about this all
the time, that could go five times the
speed of sound, the minimum Mach five.
And so they pose somewhat of a unique
threat and they're maneuverable and so
they're you know it's the new sort of
threat environment um weapon that's
entered the picture. Few countries can
build them the Chinese, Russia, US but
my uh critical technology area is to do
that at scale and at reasonable price
because they're all very expensive now.
They're exquisite. So how do you make
them like in the way and thinks about
them much more producible, much less
exquisite, much cheaper, more mass? So I
call it scaled hypersonics. Another one
is scaled directed energy. So directed
energy um is you know high powered
microwave or lasers to take down
missiles like iron beam if you think
about what the Israelis did. And now
with all the drone warfare you see, it's
much cheaper to take out drones with an
energy zap than it is to send a missile
at another at a drone, right? A $5
million missile at a $50,000 drone or
something. So directed energy again is
is the technology exists, but how do I
do that at scale?
>> I I'm a little bit curious uh on the on
the drone area in particular. One of the
um things that I think a lot of people
believe is that we're going to move from
sort of big iron giant systems into more
distributed fleets of autonomous drones
or vehicles.
And how do you think about that in the
in the context of some of the uh
programs or purchasing behavior of the
Department of War? You know, we're still
buying aircraft carriers. We're still
buying very big sort of systems and
there's all sorts of uses and needs for
those. But what do you view as the shift
to autonomy and the shift to drones
that's going to happen over time? I
mean, what what proportion of hardware
do you think goes there?
>> I think that
starting with the Russia Ukraine war,
you've got this sort of renaissance in
drones or robots. Think of it as robots
as the new front line, right? Say in a
territorial battle, if you're fighting
over land, you know, less costly in
human life if you have robots fighting
first and then before humans come in.
Without the drone warfare in in that
area of the world, you probably would
have seen way more human casualties. It
would it's already devastating. It would
have been way more devastating. [snorts]
So I think for territorial battles,
you'll see that happen real fast where
the shift the shift mix toward robots or
drones will happen much faster. When you
talk about carriers and sea, there's
still projection of power, there's still
protecting sea lanes, there's still uh
all those things which will continue for
some time. But the mix shift for is
still also going to move to autonomous
whether it's autonomous submarines
autonomous boats autonomous sort of big
drones essentially autonomous airplanes
that mix will happen that shift mix will
happen over time and you'll see every
defense budget year-over-year more and
more will be allocated to those kinds of
things as AI gets more prominent and
being able to control these things and
sense the environment around them and
and create autonomous action. So you
know in 10 years it wouldn't surprise me
if 20 30% of the budget is is is spent
on those kinds of systems which are also
cheaper. So for 20 10 20 30% of the
budget you get way more firepower than
you would for the other systems that uh
that are not designed to be you know for
that case without humans in them with
humans in them. Given the scope of the
uh different services, right, and the
scope of the organization, like what
does the prioritization exercise look
like for you operationally? You know,
you go talk to the different services,
you have all the people reporting to
you, like how do you decide if it is
these hypersonic missiles or it's
electronic warfare or space or something
else that is a is a priority for like,
you know, urgent under secretary this
year versus next. If you're at the
Pentagon and you're working for the
Secretary of War, then your job or my
job is to you as a representative for
him in the technology area is to look
across the services, Army, Navy, Air
Force, Space Force, and say what are the
common needs, uh, the enablers, the tech
enablers, if you will, or the enablers
that are useful in a broad way. If it's
just useful for one service and one use
case, that's probably something that
service can handle on their own because
they have their own labs and research
and development dollars and ability to
procure and so on. So I'm looking for
commonalities where you get economies of
scale where there's things that could be
useful for all of them. And so that
that's why it took me a couple months to
get through these 14 technology areas.
So to go get a sense of what's really
important to scale them down to six that
have some common thread to them that
could be more useful across the
enterprise.
>> So uh genai.mill
I think was like a surprise and how
quickly um it happened. Uh uh can you
tell us the story of that and what the
like the goal is? So, ji.m mill because
if you're on a on a department of war
network, you you know it's a even the
unclassified networks are secure, right?
And and different levels of security as
you go up. So, you still have to figure
out how to architect using AI in into
those networks. It's not simple as going
to chatbt.com and and signing up because
those things are sort of generally
prohibited because you have to have
restrictions on how to use them. So we
had to figure out what are the the
policies, how do you architect it in the
network so nothing goes back into the
pool of data that chat GPT or claude or
any of these companies have because we
certainly don't want no one in this
country wants our data getting out into
the general public right into these
models. So you have to architect a
different uh data flow. So but we moved
really fast. I had some like data bricks
engineers former data bricks engineers
former meta engineers former AWS people
tiger team 60 days uh good great
collaboration from Gemini from Google's
Gemini to who already works at
department of war has some familiarity
with our architecture and our systems
and got that launched to three million
people we've had over a million people
uniques use it in the last 30 days which
is kind of awesome
>> you got onethird of the enterprise on
one model That's 2.5, not 3.0. 3.0 is
coming in a couple weeks. Then we're
going to do Grock uh with XAI and we'll
see where we get to with the other two
and then we do it across classification
level. So it's going to it is going to
fundamentally change the way we we work
here and we're able to do it fast
because we got fast people.
>> It's amazing. Could you talk about more
broadly what are the set of applied AI
initiatives that you all are focused on?
I know it's a major thrust and it's one
of the key areas that you talked about.
So yeah, so instead of white papers and
theories and and and committees, we we
said okay, how are we going to deploy
AI? So we simplified it and say, well,
there's three sort of broad categories
we're going to deploy it on. One is
enterprise use cases like any company
would use it for efficiencies, right?
The second is intelligence. We get a lot
of intelligence from satellites, from
all the things the United States does
across the enterprise that uh previously
used human analysts for. And so if you
could uh improve the the
leverage of the human analyst by geing
up to them, here's 10 things we saw that
you should look at, man, you're going to
make that analyst way more efficient,
right? And then well if I could take
this type of intelligence and fuse it
with this type of intelligence I'm make
that analyst really capable because
usually one type of analyst looks at one
type of intelligence. So the more data I
can aggregate from all these sources the
more intelligence we can use which is a
great deterrent because we have the best
intelligence collection in the world.
And then third for war fighting. So war
fighting is a complex sort of thing.
You're doing war gaming, you're doing um
planning. You know there's a lot of
formalities and how you execute orders,
how you simulate what might happen if
you do different scenarios. So across
those three areas, enterprise
intelligence wargaming, we'll have a few
pace setting projects within each of
them which are designed to sort of both
break down barriers to make sure we get
their data in the system, but to show
people in the department, holy cow, you
realize this is what AI could do. So we
picked them purposefully so that we
could they could be both demonstrations
or pathfinders we call them in in our
bureaucraties or and and across these
dimensions so we hit all parts of of the
department of war. And we think that's a
way to get people thinking about AI for
every use case possible and then
deciding not to when only when it's like
clearly not useful.
>> Yeah. One question that we've asked
people from some of the major labs uh
you know researchers working on the
technology and others and they often
don't want to answer the question
because it's hard to project. So if you
feel the same feel free to de mirror but
if you think ahead 5 to 10 years and you
ask what are the big areas where AI is
going to most transform how the
department of war works how you think
about autonomous systems how you think
about warfare in general and defense in
general what do you think are the big
shifts that are going to happen or what
what does that future world look like? I
mean, I think that, you know, autonomous
systems is the clearest thing because
we're already thinking about that with
drones and then now you take that to
other things like ceronics building or
uh animals building or whatever and and
you apply AI to them and more
sophisticated AI over time that could do
sensing and change how it behaves. Those
are absolutely going to be some things
that happen uh in the next few years
that AI will have a dramatic impact on
which is why Boston Dynamics didn't make
as much progress as Optimus did and the
AI you know the things that started
later on robotics just work better
because they were more AI infused. So I
think um we're actually in a good moment
for for department of war to start
taking advantage of those things and
that's where we see some some big
improvements. And then the enterprise
piece people, you know, you're like,
it's sort of boring for Silicon Valley
people. You're like, okay, of course.
But but you guys, you guys are immersed
in that because you you're living in
like the frontier of AI use cases in the
enterprise.
>> We're just starting over here in DC. So
I think people are going to go, "Holy
cow, you don't have to write 20 page
powerpoints, 100page congressional
reports, you know, in the same way that
you did with all the manpower you did."
And that'll that'll be more exciting for
people to work at too, right? It's
because you're not doing as much
drudgery. So you'll attract better
talent uh as a result. So I think those
are two clear areas in the next few
years. You'll see a lot of uh a lot of
advancement.
>> You mentioned that one thing you have to
have uh to get these changes to happen
is like some talent from Silicon Valley
or just talent that is excited about
this pace. Like who are you recruiting?
Who do you want to be part of the
department of war? one of the big untold
stories about Doge, which is yeah, it
did some some aggressive actions in the
beginning that were um controversial and
all that, but the talent they brought
into every department um could then be
deployed on other projects like the AI
action plan uh that we did with Gen AI.
So because they were already techn like
Elon chose technically sophisticated
people. They weren't all engineers, some
were lawyers, some were had from
different but they all had a mentality
of of a fixer builder mentality. So I
borrowed a lot of those people and then
they attract more people on the way in.
And then we have this US tech force that
that Scott Kapoor from Andre and
Horowitz is deployed and we're hoping to
get thousands of people out of college
for a two-year stint sort of make it um
you know this is your service to the
country as a technologist rather than as
a soldier. Um so now we want both and
we're going to sort of you know make try
to make that a badge of honor so that
you go back into industry with some cred
you know additional credibility and be
proud of your service here. So, those
are the ways I'm attracting talent and
I'm dialing for dollars. I call everyone
who's had just left a job and I'm like,
"Hey, you have a year to spare doing the
coolest stuff you could possibly
imagine. Recruiting Tuesdays." I call
them and I call my friends like you guys
and say, "Do you have anyone who's on
the bench right now and we have so much
interesting stuff to do that I'm picking
a few people off every month."
>> You and Secretary Hexf have been on this
Arsenal of Freedom tour. Can you tell us
about it or um anything you learned or
that the American people should hear
about? It's been amazing and I I'll tell
you why. So the secretary's first reform
or transform or transformation if you
want to call it was restoring the
warrior ethos. It was bringing objective
um genderneutral race neutral standards
to military service members. Right?
These are fighting units. This isn't,
you know, this isn't ping pong. This is,
you know, this is war fighters are have
to [clears throat] be capable to do
certain things. And he was intent on
restoring those things. So that's sort
of a fitness standard if you if you want
to think about it that way like what is
a what does a fitness mean for military
and then there's the fitness of def the
industrial base and what you give the
war fighter to execute what tasks
they're given that's weapons it's
defense defense systems it's cyber cyber
effects and so on we noted in this
conversation defense industrial base
sort of wasn't ready to provide what's
necessary for the threat environment and
if you think about threat environment
what we've done in Iran what we've done
in Venezuela, uh what we've done with
the Houthis, like all just in one year,
right? Not to mention what might come in
the years ahead. You think about were we
postured for that with with the defense
industrial base. And the answer was we
weren't as postured as we wanted to be.
So he said, "Okay, my next fitness
standard is to go to industry and tell
them that we want them and need them to
produce. We have their backs. We're
going to bring all the resources to
bear. We're going to cut out the
bureaucracy. We're going to make it an
open wide front door for new entrance to
come in and help us solve problems.
We're going to change the way we buy the
way we uh do RFPs. Even like we for an
RFP, it used to be here's a 300page
requirement document. Please fill it out
and we'll decide if you win or loss. Now
we say, well, here's our problem. We're
trying to achieve this. Why don't you
come back to us with a solution? And you
allow them to to come in with different
ideas about how to solve the problem.
And there's novel concepts out there. So
it's a different. So the primes will
excel at filling out a 300page
questionnaire.
>> A startup won't. So if you change it
into here's the problem I'm trying to
solve. Well, startup may say, "Oh, I
have I have ways of solving this." So
that Arsenal freedom tour is about
giving them permission and promoting and
making sure they understand that we're
serious about the fitness and the
expansion and health of the defense
industrial base. So that's the Arsenal
Freedom Tour. Um, so it's been a lot of
fun. and been we've been gosh six days
on the road in the last two weeks and
visited about 20 companies and and it's
been awesome both the workers and the
tech together you know again these
combined hardware software systems um
it's really been inspiring to see the
motivation um in in Southern California
in Texas in North Carolina and a lot of
the places we've gone
>> amazing the other audience uh that um I
think is going to be inspired by the you
know leadership that they recognize or
just pace of doing business like um is
entrepreneurs, right? And you have
talked about the need for more new
primes and like people to solve some of
the problems that you're looking at and
are important to American dominance and
competitiveness. um what should
entrepreneurs I I think like it's it's
wonderful that um you know you've been
so early in this and a lot as well
investing in defense technologies that
has now become much more mainstream in
terms of and like it that sounds
ridiculous to say but it is acceptable
and exciting to work on American defense
now what should people look at in terms
of opportunities and what should
entrepreneurs know about doing business
with the department of war now
>> I would say that so a few things so
number one we're more open for business
than ever before because there's a
recognition that our adversaries
who started from a cleaner sheet of
paper in the last 1015 years like the
buildup the military buildup in China is
the biggest military buildup in in world
history and so there's a real uh urgency
on our side to ensure that we are ahead
but we stay ahead and that's going to
take a different level of investment and
different type of thinking than we've
had in the last 20 years in the in 80s
there were 50 defense contractors and
they were got merged so they're only
about five now. So there's a lot of room
for new entrance and and it's crazy to
me that SpaceX and Andreal and Palanteer
all had to sue the Department of War for
their first contract. [snorts]
So the idea is you don't have to sue
anymore. Come through the front door
because people are not going to fight
you. We're now excited about lower cost,
faster, more techly sophisticated
options. The caution I give
entrepreneurs is it's still not like
selling to another business. So don't
have illusions that you know this is
sort of a deal with Uber deal with MX or
something. This is still a government
and we have to make sure stuff works
because lives are at stake, right? This
is not just uh just money.
>> Uber MX is your example of like the easy
stuff, [laughter] man. Yeah,
>> you know, a lot of entrepreneurs out
there are like, I'm going to sell to my
buddy NYC today. Um, so we're we're
[clears throat] several tears up in the
hierarchy of pain, but [laughter]
>> yeah. Okay, fair enough. Fair enough.
That So, yes, I consider that was it was
easy at least in my day. And then the
other thing is when you're selling a
combined hardware software product,
um, you also have you have to
manufacture it. And that's not something
that goes back to the hardware is hard
in Silicon Valley. Well, hardware is
hard also in the defense industry. And
so producing things at scale that are
flawless
u means you have to have a different
type type of capability. Elon's mastered
it with satellites and and all that, but
there's not a lot of startups that have
mastered it. So mastering the
production, the scaled manufacturing
piece of it is a thing that startups who
are selling to the defense department
have to also prove hire for demonstrate
competence in and so on. And that's the
one thing I'm learning in my my first
eight months here is that's the piece
that I'm encouraging them like, hey, if
you come come with a tech pitch and a
prototype, that's great. What's the plan
to get me 10,000 of these? Right? And so
that's sort of the the advice I'd give
to the community.
>> How do you think about flexibility um of
budget? So, one of the things that often
happens is, you know, there there's a
lot of line items in the congressional
budget that basically establish certain
programs that are then the ones that are
uh implemented and sort of paid for or
procured. And you know, that's somewhat
different from how you think about
innovation in terms of something new
comes up, you want to rapidly be able to
iterate, to launch it, to deploy it. And
so, if how do you think about either
flexible budget spend or reallocation of
budget over time? And how does that
relate to the legislative process and
how does that impact entrepreneurs
ultimately? Yeah, it's been it's been a
problem such a problem that they've
given like an awful name to it called
the valley of death which [laughter] I
which Evo you'll hear eight ways to
Sunday here and the ways you know we've
come at it and I've come at it is we
have this defense innovation unit which
is rapid contracting has a billion
dollars has like a reasonable amount of
money to do things really fast to get
startups off the ground and get them
through. We have several other programs
that have that same capability. One's
called AFIT that takes companies that
have developed a product but now need to
scale their manufacturing. So it's a
different line in the pro you know
different point in the process. I have
the office of uh strategic capital which
has $200 billion in lending authority um
lowcost loans and that both sends a
demand signal to these companies that
other private capital crowds around it
equity capital often and it it's lowcost
loans right it's treasuries plus 100
bips and in the last I don't know four
or five months we've done five critical
minerals deals like really fast because
that's that's a target area and we'll
have other target area. So if you're a
company that's in one of the the super
critical areas, um we have this huge
lending authority there, too. So I'm
trying to collapse the value of death by
crowding capital around in different
parts of the capital cycle. Um and then
also we're reserving a bit of the budget
every year so that we can make in-ear
budget decisions because what what what
the real problem is that Congress
doesn't pass funding bills until halfway
into the next year for the year of
execution. And so if you're not planning
a year and a half ahead, you're not
you're going to miss. So all these
funding cycle mechanisms are a way to
get at that valley of death. And I think
we've got we're really close to sort of
pinching pinching that into to being
very minimal if if it exists at all. And
and by the way, helps that you guys are
investing in defense tech also, you and
other your your peers, because
>> um equity capital has a lot of has a lot
of uh value here too. when you see
promising companies and we see promising
companies, you're going to say, "Oh,
this is a promising company. They've got
their DIU deal. I'm happy to fund them
now and that, you know, to help solve
it, too."
>> You've also, I think, advocated for dual
use companies. They're doing things for
defense as well as the broader world.
Are there any specific areas that you
most wish a company existed today for
where, you know, you think it's a sparse
landscape or other areas that if there
are founders watching this, you think
they should really focus from an
innovation perspective? Yeah, I mean
there's there you know this hypersonic
weapons thing is is kind of a big deal.
There is a startup um or you know very
small number of startups that are
innovating here but former SpaceX people
who are running around who understand
the physics of of that kind of thing. So
I wish there were more. I think there's
going to be when you think about drones
not just the small drones get the bigger
and bigger drones that really look like
long range missiles if you will be
innovation there. There's innovation in
the technology that goes into a drone
that seeks things in a GPS denied
environment. Um, you know, it makes them
more precise. For Golden Dome, which
you've heard about, we're looking at how
to take things out from space, which is
a compelling, really complex but
interesting proposition.
>> So, there's those are kind of some
areas. And then from an AI standpoint,
you know, I feel like we're generally
okay with the investment. I mean there's
so much money going in there that that's
like a well-funded area both the
foundation models and the derivatives
that are trying to do specific apps you
know uh on those models. So, you know,
that's some direction for folks
>> when you think about the pace of uh
technology adop. I'm just thinking about
you as like the CTO of a 3 million
person organization, you know, whether
or not those people are war fighters,
right? Um and and you know, selling if
you have portfolio companies that sell
to very large organizations, you see a
large span of adoption of those tools
over time. is amazing that genai.mill
has gone a million users recently. Um,
how do you think about like the the
workforce, right? You said it's the
biggest single organization in the world
that's consuming this technology, but
you have to do a bunch of change
management. Is that something that you
you think through?
>> Yeah, I mean, I try not to think through
it so hard so that I'm like, "Oh my
gosh, this is going to be too hard to
do." Um, sort of the again the Uber
entrepreneur mentality. It's like let's
like move and see how far we can get
things into the enterprise until someone
says stop. Um so it's a different way of
thinking about it.
>> Just make forward progress as fast as
you can. That's a good strategy too.
>> It's you know it tends to work. Does it
work as fast as in as in private
industry? No. But it still works.
There's still human desire to do better
in in every case. And I do think uh
bureaucrats get a bad rap where
bureaucracies get deserve the bad rap.
Right? It's the collection of rules,
regulations, people, culture that end up
being hard to change. Whereas any one
individual person, they want to thrive.
Especially if you're a department of
war, you kind of you don't you don't
come to Department of War if you're not
missionoriented.
You don't have sort of an ethic that
something you're working for something
bigger than yourself.
You're certainly not coming here to make
a buck, right?
And that gives us a lot of really good
motivation from people. And if I could
just get some tools in their hands and
talk to them and give them some
leadership and some uh you stuff, you
surprising how receptive you'd find even
in this large of a department. in a
different direction because you
mentioned like I was just thinking about
some of the hardest problems that you
have to go work on. Um one is like
rebuild the defense industrial base,
right? Uh and how do you like reignite
that ecosystem when um a lot of people
have given up on American manufacturing
in different domains? What do you think
are like the the necessary missing
components if you know you're saying the
demand is there? Because I think a lot
of the arguments has just been like it's
too expensive. we no longer have the
capability or the knowledge in the
United States. Like how do you how do
you think about that?
>> I mean, I think in some cases it's a
matter
of national survival, right? In in so
far as like I'm I'm as free market a
person as as anyone. But I think if you
look back on the last 20 years and say
should we have outsourced all our
pharmaceuticals, all our critical
minerals, all our semiconductors,
all of it, all of our nuclear power
plant building capabilities.
So that the vi like if there's a
scenario where you're ad the adversary
has control of those things, you don't
have control of your own destiny. You
would say that well it's worth the cost
to bring it back. And bringing it back
is not a snap your fingers thing, but
with American ingenuity and
entrepreneurship and capital markets, I
think we can do it and we have to do it
and we are doing it and will do it. So
you pick, you know, it's a little bit of
a Maslo's hierarchy of needs. Like what
are the most important things we have to
give back? Well, this deal with China
says that in a year we have to, you
know, the critical minerals export
control thing. You know, you know who if
assuming that stays there. So, we're
like operating like we have to be
self-sufficient in a year. And then you
go down the list of of things and you
try to tackle them. And the good news is
the enthusiasm about doing it is again
widespread. And it's some it's I I
attribute it to President Trump. I
attribute it secretary secretary Hexat.
I attribute it to just smart people
looking at the playing field and saying
ah you know we have to be proficient in
some of these things and we have to do
it ourselves. you know, there's 200
pharmaceuticals on the critical shortage
list because we're dependent on other
countries. So, that's not that's not a
viable thing. We don't want that for our
children our children, right? So,
whatever it takes, we have to do it. And
I'm relying on folks like you and the
people you invest in to to help on that.
And I think we're going to we just have
to create the market conditions where
it's viable.
>> My optimism here amounts to in certain
areas there is demand and that was not
actually recognized before, right? like
we need to make it here and we need to
have the ability to make it. And like if
if there's a massive regrowth of
American manufacturing, it will not be
in exactly the form it was like 40 years
ago, right? It will be because it is
driven by automation, better processes,
AI, like being able to make things other
people are incapable of making versus
competing in necessarily a global
marketplace for cost. Um, but I think
that's totally doable. That's exciting.
>> Yeah. Yeah, but the one thing I would
add there is like who's going to who's
going to uh dig and weld and electrify
all the data centers we're building?
There's going to be people to a large
degree. There'll be robots doing some of
this, but there'll be people. And who's
going to build all the new housing we
need in these cities because of the
housing shortage? Who, you know, so
there's there's going to be work. It may
not be in an auto plant to the degree we
had workers in auto plant as a
percentage of sort of the workforce, but
there's going to be other big jobs. I
mean the welding jobs we're trying to
build ships here
>> can't find enough and it's a job that
pays six more than six figures in areas
that are not high cost to live in. So
it's like how do you point people with
the right capital trade do the right
training and so on. So I think there's a
lot of opportunity uh for all categories
of workers. Um but yes you're right in
some cases you know on farms are you
going to have robots pick strawberry?
Are you going to are you going to use
robots and automation to figure fill
holes that are that we can't otherwise
fill? Like yes. And we're best
positioned to do it.
>> And I I was really also thinking in the
like effective productivity sense,
right? Like American workers with better
automation and better lines and all that
can produce things that are bestin-class
and cost effective.
>> The cost effective thing too is
sometimes a little bit overstated in
terms of um there are subsidies for
example for our earth minerals by some
of our adversaries etc. And so I don't
think these have acted as free markets.
I think in many cases there's been very
smart strategic action by China and
others to ensure the market isn't a free
market so that there isn't competition.
>> Yeah. And that's and that's a great
point because if it was a true free
market it wouldn't be as it wouldn't
have disrupted but there was a lot of
dumping going on in certain areas to
crush the other industries. I'm somewhat
familiar with this from the Uber Lift
days, but but the there's a lot of how
how do you inject capital into in a
certain way that gives you an an unfair
advantage and and some, you know, people
could debate the tariffs, but some of
the tariff notion is to balance that
dumping uh capability. So if you could
in theory have a free market price for
something well if we're if we can't
control one side of it we have at least
some levers on the other side of it to
try to create some balance.
>> So you know I guess related to that you
all did some really interesting deals
around uh rare earth minerals through
the office of strategic capital. Could
you talk about some of the other
initiatives that you have going on there
right now? Yeah. So those are targeted
at what part of the defense industrial
base has a brittle supply chain where
the technology exists. There's actually
probably a company that actually does it
here, but we need them to produce 10
times more than they're producing now.
And so we've identified, we went through
like exhaustively these supply chains or
what are the things that go into this?
Like who knew Germanmanium was a thing
three years ago? The American public
wasn't thinking about it. So what we're
trying to get ahead of it is what are
the 10 20 things that are components
whether it's a brushless motor a
brushless motor goes into a drone we're
dependent on chi the on China for
brushless motors so uh you know what
kind of semiconductors besid besides
TSMC go into sort of a data center what
are other things we have to make sure we
domesticate and how do I um ensure that
there that I'm taking the companies that
exist and making sure they have the
capacity to serve the whole nation's
needs. needs and that's pretty exciting
uh too because that's another way of of
getting at um the supply chain fragility
and our adversary dependency. So you
kind of can solve potentially both. We
used to have a very robust defense
industrial base and an industrial base
period. Now you're down in some cases
one supplier of a nozzle that goes in 20
different you know systems and I want
that one nozzle maker to succeed but I
also maybe want two or three so that
we're innovating while we're doing that
and that's part of the mission of the
office of strategic capital and we have
a lot of money to do it.
>> I think one of the things that's um
really cool about studying some of this
uh stuff on the supply chain side is
actually like how distributed it is. Um
obviously you know you spent a long time
in Silicon Valley a lot of innovation is
going to happen in you know in Southern
California and Silicon Valley but I
remember like as you said I didn't know
what geranium was I remember looking it
up when there was this department of war
investment in uh lattis materials and I
was like it's in Bosezeman Montana right
that's where we are making you know
germanmanium and silicon crystal right
and we need it for defense optics and so
I I do think that even just like showing
people how much demand there is for like
the entire supply chain across different
communities is really important.
>> Yeah, I think that's right. I mean, you
know, fiber optic cable, we don't make
fiber optic cables in this country.
Fiber optic, you know, basic fiber,
which they're using in the Ukraine
Russia war to do drones because they're
jamming and all that and we use for
telecom and all that. So, so yeah, it's
creating that list, communicating it
broadly,
>> um, trying to ensure the market
conditions are such that we're not
subject to the dumping sort of practices
that could, you know, really kill an
industry very early on. So, it's a
complex set of things, which is why why
a research and engineering organization
would have a strategic capital arm,
right? That's why those two things go
together, which is not apparent from the
outside, is because both things go
together a bit. Is there a list
published anywhere where founders who
are listening in can go and see what
they should be building or areas where
there's more demand than either people
understand or is anticipated or where
the DO is willing to help provide
capital or other things to accelerate
it.
>> So the DIU for defense is like four or
five categories of things that they look
at. So that's that's sort of a published
and public thing. The office of
strategic capital is a little more
proactive. They're going to say, "We
have this whole I'm going to go find
companies that already exist that do
this." So, it's not for startups because
it's a lending facility, if you will.
So, they're looking for companies that
already exist and how do I expand their
production? Uh, but it's a good point
like, you know, at some point, I was
talking to the secretary about this the
other day. It's like we should have some
forum for
>> for talking about the things that we
need more proactively so investors and
entrepreneurs can think about them.
Because if you're expanding capacity
through loans, you could also expand
capacity through new companies doing the
same thing. And so that's why I'm
wondering is there good point
>> mechanism to get
>> we're just looking for a to-do list.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. [laughter]
>> Just to be clear. Yeah.
>> Exactly.
>> I I just have a last question for you.
Um you're you know couple couple months
in guns blazing in terms of uh you
impact already. what most surprised you
or is like a thing you've changed about
how you operate or something you know
you learned
>> and and this is your sec second stint in
government by the way right and so it'd
be really interesting to contrast first
in versus second stint through that lens
in terms of what's what's shifted or
what's different this time around
>> yeah so I was a white house fellow call
it a glorified intern in 2009 to 2010
and we're in the middle of the global
war on terror and so what were fighting
at that time was, you know, a bunch of
insurgents who had sort of crude weapons
like improvised explosive devices and so
on. Now we have a nearpeer adversary
that has space capabilities,
you know, long range strike
capabilities, drones, AI. So the
battlefield has shifted so dramatically
toward being tech superior than it was
back then. back then we were it was more
like we had the superior tech but then
we were just vulnerable by um
adversaries who had nothing to lose that
suicide I mean it was a totally
different kind of adversary so that's
been a dramatic change and I didn't you
know I guess I did realize that and part
of why I took this job is that I saw
that change and I wanted to be part of
sort of the solution there um but I
think what surprised me is that the the
recognition broadly speaking speaking
that this a this nearper adversary had
been doing so much and so little time in
a concentrated way didn't really hit me
until I got in and started sort of
getting you know really understanding
what had happened to some of our markets
like again the Germanian example the
fiberglass example the Brussels voters
example uh the importance of Taiwan
these things you know when you're on the
outside you you understand them
theoretically but now I understand them
viscerally
>> well amazing thank you so much for
everything you're working towards today.
I think um obviously you're one of the
people that's been motivated by showing
up and trying to have a big impact for
the country. So, you know, it's uh
exciting to to watch what's what's
happening and changing.
>> Yeah. Thanks for your for both of your
support and I will come back to you with
the to-do list. [snorts]
>> We're ready.
>> Wonderful. Yeah.
>> All right. Thank you so much.
>> Good. Good talking to you.
>> Find us on Twitter at No Prior Pod.
Subscribe to our YouTube channel if you
want to see our faces. Follow the show
on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or wherever
you listen. That way, you get a new
episode every week. And sign up for
emails or find transcripts for every
episode at no-briers.com. [music]